[pickers] Use grid for modifying the layout (#6900)
mui/mui-x: docs/data/date-pickers/custom-layout/custom-layout.md

---
product: date-pickers
title: Date and Time pickers - Custom layout
---

# Custom layout

<p class="description">The date picker lets you reorganize its layout</p>

## Default layout structure

By default, pickers are made of 3 sub elements present in the following order:

- The **toolbar** displaying the selected date. Can be enforced with `showToolbar` porp.
- The **content** that includes the current view, and the tabs to swicth between views if necessary.
- The **action bar** allowings some interactions. Can be added with [`componentsProps.actionBar`](/x/react-date-pickers/custom-components/#action-bar) porp.

You can [customize those components](/x/react-date-pickers/custom-components/) individualy by using `components` and `componentsProps`.

### Orientation

The layout can be switch between two modes by using props `orientation`.
This prop value can either be `'portrait'` or `'landscape'`.

Here is a demonstration with the 3 components highligted with color full borders

{{"demo": "LayoutBlocks.js"}}

## Customize layout

### Understanding the structure

> The layout is structured as follow:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The layout is structured as follows:
```

> A `<LayoutRoot />` component wrapp all the sub components to provide the structure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `<LayoutRoot />` component wraps all the sub-components to provide the structure.
```

By default it renders a `div` with `display: grid`.

> Such that all sub-components take place into a 3 by 3 [CSS grid](https://developer.mozilla.org/fr/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_Grid_Layout).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Such that all sub-components take place inside a 3 by 3 [CSS grid](https://developer.mozilla.org/fr/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_Grid_Layout).
```

Subcomponents are wrapped into layout helper, responsible for placing it into the grid.
Here is an otherview of the structure.

```jsx
<LayoutRoot>
  // Toolbar
  <LayoutToolbar>
    <Toolbar />
  </LayoutToolbar>
  // Content
  <LayoutContent>
    <Tabs />
    <View />
  </LayoutContent>
  // Action bar
  <LayoutActionBar>
    <ActionBar />
  </LayoutActionBar>
</LayoutRoot>
```

> ### Moving components

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Moving elements
```

> To move an element, the easiest way is to override it's wrapper position with properties [`gridColumn`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/grid-column) and [`gridRow`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/grid-row).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To move an element—the easiest way is to override it's wrapper position with [`gridColumn`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/grid-column) and [`gridRow`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/grid-row) properties.
```

> In the next example, the action bar is replaced by a list, and placed at the right of the component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the next example—the action bar is replaced by a list and placed at the right of the component.
```

> To place it at the right, we use style `{ gridColumn: '3', gridRow: '2' }`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Placing at the right is achieved by applying `{ gridColumn: '3', gridRow: '2' }` style.
```

---

# Custom layout

<p class="description">The Date and Time Pickers let you reorganize the layout</p>

## Default layout structure

By default, pickers are made of 4 sub elements present in the following order:

- The **toolbar** displaying the selected date. Can be enforced with `showToolbar` prop.
- The **content** displaying the current view. Can be a calendar, or a clock.
- The **tabs** allowing to switch between day and time views in Date Time Pickers.
- The **action bar** allowing some interactions. Can be added with [`componentsProps.actionBar`](/x/react-date-pickers/custom-components/#action-bar) prop.

By default the `content` and `tabs` are wrapped together in a `contentWrapper` to simplify the layout.

You can [customize those components](/x/react-date-pickers/custom-components/) individually by using `components` and `componentsProps`.

## Orientation

Toggling layout can be achieved by changing `orientation` prop value between `'portrait'` or `'landscape'`.

Here is a demonstration with the 3 main blocks outlined with color borders.

{{"demo": "LayoutBlocks.js", "hideToolbar": true, "bg": "inline"}}

## Layout structure

The layout is structured as follows:

> A `<PickersLayoutRoot />` wraps all the sub-components to provide the structure.

Reviewer: We are using **sub-components** in the side menu as well 🤔 
![Screenshot 2022-12-23 at 08 59 27](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/4941090/209287907-d1177805-b870-420b-be17-4773e86ce986.png)

> A `<PickersLayoutRoot />` wraps all the sub-components to provide the structure.

Reviewer 2: I saw both in use on the documentation page, so I did a quick research on it yesterday, and "subcomponent" (without hyphen) seems way more commonly used. But they are both correct. 
In our docs, only MUI Base is consistently using it without, but it's also where Sam made his biggest contribution.

Generally speaking, I prefer the readability without the hyphen, but I'm fine with keeping the hyphen as well.

> A `<PickersLayoutRoot />` wraps all the sub-components to provide the structure.

Reviewer: Gotcha, I also don't have a strong preference, as long as we are more or less consistent. 👌

> A `<PickersLayoutRoot />` wraps all the sub-components to provide the structure.

Author: Ok, then I will do the modification an enforce the consistency :)

By default it renders a `div` with `display: grid`.
Such that all sub-components are placed in a 3 by 3 [CSS grid](https://developer.mozilla.org/fr/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_Grid_Layout).

> Subcomponents are wrapped inside layout helper, responsible for placing it into the grid.

Author: Totally false since I modified the behavior 🙈

Here is an overview of the structure.

```jsx
<PickersLayoutRoot>
  {toolbar}
  <PickersLayoutContentWrapper>
    {tabs}
    {content}
  </PickersLayoutContentWrapper>
  {actionBar}
</PickersLayoutRoot>
```

## CSS customization

To move an element—the easiest way is to override it's wrapper position with [`gridColumn`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/grid-column) and [`gridRow`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/grid-row) properties.

In the next example, the action bar is replaced by a list, and placed at the left of the component.
Placing at the right is achieved by applying `{ gridColumn: 1, gridRow: 2 }` style to it.

> {{"demo": "MovingActions.js"}}

Reviewer 2: Changing the `gridColumn` and `gridRow` of the action bar on these demos has no effect.

We need to add the respective class to the custom ActionList to make the selector works. 
This is worth mentioning in the docs as well.

`<List className={pickersLayoutClasses.actionBar}>`

Reviewer 2: There's an open question on using the class to get the gridLayout working. In this case, it had no effect, but it could potentially break something. 
Perhaps we should also handle this case on the docs.

Author: It's a broader topic, about how to propagate correctly elements

I updated the demo as follow such that users can to customization directly in the docs, and added a warning such that they know about it

```diff
--- a/docs/data/date-pickers/custom-layout/MovingActions.tsx
+++ b/docs/data/date-pickers/custom-layout/MovingActions.tsx
@@ -10,7 +10,7 @@ import { Unstable_StaticNextDatePicker as StaticNextDatePicker } from '@mui/x-da
 import { PickersActionBarProps } from '@mui/x-date-pickers/PickersActionBar';
 
 function ActionList(props: PickersActionBarProps) {
-  const { onAccept, onClear, onCancel, onSetToday } = props;
+  const { onAccept, onClear, onCancel, onSetToday, className } = props;
   const actions = [
     { text: 'Accept', method: onAccept },
     { text: 'Clear', method: onClear },
@@ -18,7 +18,7 @@ function ActionList(props: PickersActionBarProps) {
     { text: 'Today', method: onSetToday },
   ];
   return (
-    <List>
+    <List className={className}>
       {actions.map(({ text, method }) => (
         <ListItem key={text} disablePadding>
```

## DOM customization

In the demonstration above, the layout is modified thanks to CSS.
Such modification can lead to inconsistencies between the visual aspect, and the DOM structure.
In the previous demonstration, the tab order is broken, because the action bar appears before the calendar whereas in the DOM the action bar is still after the calendar.

To modify the DOM structure, you can create your own `Layout` component.
To simplify the job, use the `usePickerLayout` hook which takes Layout's props as an input and returns React nodes.
Then you can fully customize the DOM structure.

```jsx
const { usePickerLayout } from '@mui/x-date-pickers/PickersLayout';

const MyCustomLayout = (props) => {
  const { toolbar, tabs, content, actionBar} = usePickerLayout(props);

  // Put the action bar before the content
  return <div>
    {toolbar}
    {actionBar}
    {content}
  </div>
}
```

> This slot can also be used to add additional information in the layout.

Reviewer 2: I feel this is quite important information.
To consider:

```suggestion
:::info
This slot can also be used to add additional information in the layout.
:::
```

Here is the previous demonstration with a fix for the tabulation order and logo added into the layout.

> Notice the use of `pickersLayoutClasses`, `PickersLayoutRoot`, and `PickersLayoutContentWrapper` to avoid having to rewrite the default CSS.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Notice the use of `pickersLayoutClasses`, `PickersLayoutRoot`, and `PickersLayoutContentWrapper` to avoid rewriting the default CSS.
```

To move an element—the easiest way is to override it's wrapper position with [`gridColumn`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/grid-column) and [`gridRow`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/grid-row) properties.

In the next example, the action bar is replaced by a list, and placed at the right of the component.
Placing at the right is achieved by applying `{ gridColumn: '3', gridRow: '2' }` style.

{{"demo": "MovingActions.js"}}

### Accessibility

In the demonstration above, the layout is modified thanks to CSS.
Such modification can lead to inconsistencies between the visual aspect, and the DOM structure.
In the previous demonstration, the tab order is broken, because the action bar appears before the calendar whereas in the DOM the action bar is still after the calendar.

To reorder the DOM structure, you can use the layout callback.
It gives you access to the main parts of the layout: `toolbar`, `content`, `actionBar` and can order them in `children` property.

```jsx
componentsProps={{
  layout: ({toolbar, content, actionBar}) =>({
    sx: {
      /* CSS reordering */
    },
    children: [toolbar, actionBar, content ]
  }),
}}
```

> Here is the previous demonstration with a fix for the tabulation order.

Author: Yes, I forget that I moved action list from left to right to hidde the problem ;)
